prītyā daityastava tanumaha:prekṣaṇāt sarvathā'pi
tvāmārādhyannajita racayannañjaliṃ sañjagāda |
matta: kiṃ te samabhilaṣitaṃ viprasūno vada tvaṃ
vittaṃ bhaktaṃ bhavanamavanīṃ vā'pi sarvaṃ pradāsye ||1||
prītyā	pleased
daitya:-tava	the Asura, Thy
tanum-aha:-	majestic form, oh!
prekṣaṇāt	on seeing
sarvathā-api	in every way
tvām-ārādhyan	honouring Thee
ajita	O Invincible One!
racayan-añjaliṃ	with folded palms
sañjagād	said
matta:	'from me
kiṃ te samabhilaṣitaṃ	what by you is desired
viprasūno vada tvaṃ	O Braahmin boy! you say
vittaṃ bhaktaṃ bhavanam-avanīm	wealth, food, house, land,
vā-api sarvaṃ	or even all of them
pradāsye	I shall give'
Impressed on seeing Thy glorious majestic sight, the Asura Bali honoured and worshipped Thee in every way. He said with folded palms 'What do you desire from me? O Braahmin boy, you say, is it wealth, food, house or land or everything. I shall give you all.'
tāmīkṣaṇāṃ baligiramupākarṇya kāruṇyapūrṇo'-
pyasyotsekaṃ śamayitumanā daityavaṃśaṃ praśaṃsan |
bhūmiṃ pādatrayaparimitāṃ prārthayāmāsitha tvaṃ
sarvaṃ dehīti tu nigadite kasya hāsyaṃ na vā syāt ||2||
tām-akṣīṇāṃ bali-giram-	that bold voice of Bali
upākarṇya	on hearing
kāruṇya-pūrṇa:-api	though full of compassion
asya-utsekaṃ	his (Bali's) pride
śamayitumanā	desirous of curbing
daitya-vaṃśaṃ praśaṃsan	the lineage of the Asuras praising
bhūmiṃ pāda-traya-parimitāṃ	earth, by three steps (of thy feet) measurable
prārthayāmāsitha tvaṃ	asked for Thou
sarvaṃ dehi-iti	give everything' thus
tu nigadite	indeed having said
kasya hāsyaṃ	whose sneer (ridicule)
na vā syāt	would not be invited
On hearing those bold words of Bali, though filled with compassion Thou were desirous of curbing his pride. Speaking highly of the generosity of the Asura clan, Thou asked for earth measurable by Thy three steps. To ask for all, would have invited sneer from everyone.
viśveśaṃ māṃ tripadamiha kiṃ yācase bāliśastvaṃ
sarvāṃ bhūmiṃ vṛṇu kimamunetyālapattvāṃ sa dṛpyan |
yasmāddarpāt tripadaparipūrtyakṣama: kṣepavādān
bandhaṃ cāsāvagamadatadarho'pi gāḍhopaśāntyai ||3||
viśveśaṃ māṃ	(who is ) the lord of the three worlds, to me
tripadam-iha kiṃ yācase	for (mere) three paces of earth, how do you ask
bāliśa:-tvaṃ	simpleton you
sarvāṃ bhūmiṃ vṛṇu	the whole earth ask for
kim-amunā-	of what use is this
iti-ālapat-tvāṃ	thus telling Thee
sa dṛpyan	he (said) proudly
yasmāt-darpāt	because of which pride
tripada-paripūrti-akṣama:	three paces even fully failing (to give)
kṣepavādān	and inviting ridicule
bandhaṃ ca-	and bondage
asau-agamat-	this (Bali) was subjected to (received)
atadarha:-api	(though) not deserving even
gāḍhopaśāntyai	for (acquiring) complete detachment
To me, who is the lord of all the three worlds how do you ask for mere three paces of earth? You simpleton! Of what use is this? Ask for the whole earth.' Thus he proudly told Thee. Because of this pride he failed to give fully even three paces of earth and invited ridicule and bondage. Bali did not deserve it but he was subjected to all this for acquiring complete detachment.
pādatrayyā yadi na mudito viṣṭapairnāpi tuṣye-
dityukte'smin varada bhavate dātukāme'tha toyam |
daityācāryastava khalu parīkṣārthina: preraṇāttaṃ
mā mā deyaṃ harirayamiti vyaktamevābabhāṣe ||4||
pādatrayyā	with three steps
yadi na mudita:	if (one) is not satisfied
viṣṭapai:-na-api	even by the three worlds will not
tuṣyet-	be satisfied
iti-ukte-asmin	thus having said to him
varada	O Bestower of Boons!
bhavate dātukāme-atha	then, to Thee as (he) was wanting to give
toyam	water
daitya-ācārya:-	the Asuras' Guru (Shukraacharya)
tava khalu parīkṣārthina:	indeed by Thy desire to test (Bali)
preraṇāt-	(and by) Thy prompting
taṃ mā mā deyaṃ	to him, do not do not give
hari:-ayam-iti	Hari this is, thus
vyaktam-eva-ābabhāṣe	openly (clearly) told (him)
O Bestower of Boons! When Thou told him that he who is not satisfied with three steps of land will not be satisfied even by the three worlds, Bali was about to pour the pre-gift oblation water to Thee. To test Bali's integrity, and so by Thy prompting the Guru of Asuras, Shukraachaarya, told him clearly to refrain from giving the gift since Thou were Hari.
yācatyevaṃ yadi sa bhagavān pūrṇakāmo'smi so'haṃ
dāsyāmyeva sthiramiti vadan kāvyaśapto'pi daitya: |
vindhyāvalyā nijadayitayā dattapādyāya tubhyaṃ
citraṃ citraṃ sakalamapi sa prārpayattoyapūrvam ||5||
yācati-evaṃ yadi	begging thus if He is
sa bhagavān	That Lord
pūrṇakāma:-asmi	the one whose desires are fulfilled
sa:-ahaṃ	that I am
dāsyāmi-eva sthiram-iti vadan	(I) shall give, certainly, thus saying
kāvya-śapta:-api daitya:	though cursed by Kaavya (Shukraachaarya)
vindhyāvalyā	by Vindhyaavalya
nija-dayitayā	by his wife
datta-pādyāya tubhyaṃ	to Thee whom the water for washing the feet had already been given
citraṃ citraṃ	how wonderful
sakalam-api sa	everything also he (Bali)
prārpayat-toya-pūrvam	offered even before the water
Bali firmly said that he would consider himself blessed if the Lord himself comes begging to him thus, and so he would certainly make the gift. For such a disobedience Kaavya, (Shukraachaarya) cursed him. Then, to Thee whose feet had already been washed by the waters poured by Bali's wife Vindhyaavali, he proceeded to offer everything with the pouring of the water. How wonderful!
nissandehaṃ ditikulapatau tvayyaśeṣārpaṇaṃ tad-
vyātanvāne mumucu:-ṛṣaya: sāmarā: puṣpavarṣam |
divyaṃ rūpaṃ tava ca tadidaṃ paśyatāṃ viśvabhājā-
muccairuccairavṛdhadavadhīkṛtya viśvāṇḍabhāṇḍam ||6||
nissandehaṃ	without any doubt or hesitation
ditikulapatau	(when) by the Asura king
tvayi-aśeṣa-arpaṇaṃ	to Thee everything was offered
tat vyātanvāne	and that was given
mumucu: ṛṣaya:	showered sages
sāmarā:	along with the Devas
puṣpavarṣam	a rain of flowers
divyaṃ rūpaṃ tava ca	and that divine form of thine (as Vaamana)
tat-idaṃ paśyatāṃ	that which was seen
viśvabhājām-	by the inhabitants of the three worlds
uccai:-uccai:-avṛdhat-	higher and higher increased (grew)
avadhīkṛtya	extending to the dimension
viśva-aṇḍa-bhāṇḍam	of the world's cosmic sphere
When the Asura king Bali, without any doubt and hesitation offered and gave to Thee everything, the sages and the Devas shed a rain of flowers. As all the inhabitants of the three worlds looked on, that divine form of Thine as Vaamana, increased higher and higher extending to the dimension of the cosmic sphere.
tvatpādāgraṃ nijapadagataṃ puṇḍarīkodbhavo'sau
kuṇḍītoyairasicadapunādyajjalaṃ viśvalokān |
harṣotkarṣāt subahu nanṛte khecarairutsave'smin
bherīṃ nighnan bhuvanamacarajjāmbavān bhaktiśālī ||7||
tvat-pād-agraṃ	the tip of Thy foot
nija-pada-gataṃ	(when) it reached its own realm (of Satyaloka)
puṇḍarīkodbhava:-asau	that Brahmaa
kuṇḍī-toyai:-asicat	with the water from his kamandalu (jug) washed (the foot)
apunāt-yat-jalaṃ	purified (in the form of Ganga) that water
viśvalokān	all the worlds
harṣotkarṣāt	in ecstasy
subahu nanṛte	very much danced
khecarai:-	the Gandharvas and Vidyaadharas
utsave-asmin	on this auspicious occasion
bherīṃ nighnan	the drum beating
bhuvanam-acarat-	the world went about
jāmbavān bhaktiśālī	Jaambavaan the great devotee
As the tip of Thy feet reached its own realm, the Satyalok, Brahmaa washed the foot with the water from his kamandalu-jug. That water, which became Aakaash Ganga, purified all the worlds. The Gandharvaas danced and danced in ecstasy. On this auspicious occasion the great devotee Jaambavaan went around the world beating the drum.
tāvaddaityāstvanumatimṛte bharturārabdhayuddhā
devopetairbhavadanucaraissaṅgatā bhaṅgamāpan |
kālātmā'yaṃ vasati purato yadvaśāt prāgjitā: sma:
kiṃ vo yuddhairiti baligirā te'tha pātālamāpu: ||8||
tāvat-	then
daityā:-tu-	the Asuras
anumatim-ṛte bhrartu:-	without the permission of the master (Bali)
ārabdha-yuddhā:	having started to fight
deva-	O Lord!
upetai-bhavat-anucarai:-	Thy emissaries who had approached (come there)
saṅgatā:	and opposed
bhaṅgam-āpan	and got defeated (the Asuras)
kālātmā-ayaṃ vasati purata:	This is Time incarnate who is standing in front
yat-vaśāt prāk-jitā: sma:	by whose favour we had won before (formerly)
kiṃ va: yuddhai:-	what is the use of our fight?'
iti bali-girā	thus by Bali's words
te-atha pātālam-āpu:	they then took to the Paataal
O Lord! The Asuras started to fight with the Devas without their master Bali's permission.They were defeated by Thy emissaries who had come there and were fighting on the Deva's side. Bali told them that the Lord in the form of Time was standing before them by whose grace they had won earlier, and was now against them. So it was no use to fight. At this the Asuras went away to Paataala.
pāśairbaddhaṃ patagapatinā daityamuccairavādī-
stārttīyīkaṃ diśa mama padaṃ kiṃ na viśveśvaro'si |
pādaṃ mūrdhni praṇaya bhagavannityakampaṃ vadantaṃ
prahlādstaṃ svayamupagato mānayannastavīttvām ||9||
pāśai:-baddhaṃ	tied with ropes
patagapatinā	by Garuda
daityam-uccai:-avādī:-	to the Asura (Thou) loudly said
tārttīyīkaṃ diśa mama padaṃ	the third (place) show my step (to be put)
kiṃ na viśveśvara:-asi	are you not the lord of all the worlds
pādaṃ mūrdhni praṇaya bhagavan-	the foot (step) on (my) head, place,O Lord!
iti-akampaṃ vadantaṃ	thus (as) he said without any trembling
prahlāda:-taṃ svayam-upagata:	Prahlaad himself came near him
mānayan-astavīta-tvām	praised Thee and sang Thy Praises
Garuda, Thy attendant had tied Bali with ropes by this time. Thou asked him loudly, 'Show me the place for my third step. Are you not the lord of the three worlds?' Without any hesitation Bali requested Thee to place Thy foot on his head to measure the third step. Prahlaad himself appeared by Bali's side, praised him and sang hymns of praises to Thee.
darpocchittyai vihitamakhilaṃ daitya siddho'si puṇyai-
rlokaste'stu tridivavijayī vāsavatvaṃ ca paścāt |
matsāyujyaṃ bhaja ca punarityanvagṛhṇā baliṃ taṃ
vipraissantānitamakhavara: pāhi vātālayeśa ||10||
darpa-ucchittyai	to remove your pride completely
vihitam-akhilaṃ	all this was done
daitya siddha:-asi puṇyai:-	O Asura! you are blessed by your many good deeds
loka:-te-astu	may you rule the (sutala) world
tridiva-vijayī	(which may be) superior even to heaven (Swarga)
vāsava-tvaṃ	(the position of ) indra, you (enjoy)
ca paścāt	and afterwards (in the next Manvantra)
mat-sāyujyaṃ bhaja ca puna:-	with Me union enjoy also (attain to) then
iti-anvagṛhṇā: baliṃ taṃ	thus blessing that Bali
viprai:-santānita-makhavara:	(Thou) who had the priests complete the great Yanjya
pāhi vātālayeśa	O Lord of Guruvaayur! Protect me
"O Asura! In order to curb your pride completely, all this was done. You are blessed by your many good deeds. You will rule your region Sutala, which will be superior even to heaven. Later, in the next Manvantra you will become Indra and ultimately you will attain union with me." Blessing Bali thus, Thou had the priests complete the great Vishwajit Yanjya. O Lord of Guruvaayur! protect me.